Let's talk about variables and values.
In this chapter,
we're gonna talk about simple let and
const declarations and
the very basics of typing functions.
And that will serve as
a good foundation for
us to start building other
more complicated types on.
So variable declarations in JavaScript,
kind of look like this, right?
We have let and const hopefully
nobody's using bar anymore, but
we can just say something like,
let age = 6.
And you may note that TypeScript is
kinda figured out this is a number.
This does not seem like
an impressive trick,
because obviously 6 is a number, right?
Well, what you're seeing is inference,
where TypeScript can contextually
understand the situation.
It can see that yes, we have a variable
declaration with an initializer, right?
Where we're assigning it to 6 right away,
clearly that should be a number, right?
And not every programming language has
this by the wa,y if you work in the Java
or the C++ area,
every variable declaration typically
comes with the type up front.
You have to say like int age =6,
you'd have to say it's an IT.
This up here seems like
regular JavaScript.
But down here, you could totally
do this with JavaScript, but
TypeScript is unhappy, why?
Age was the variable that was born
with a type and that type is number.
And we can see that if we attempt
to give it a value that's a string,
it's going to yell at us.
This is the kind of thing that
TypeScript is designed to catch.
I want you to remember that in TypeScript
variables are born with their types.
So there are things we can do,
which we'll learn about later to
make these types more specific.
But it's hard to make them more general,
once they're declared.
So, it's important to make sure that
when you define your variables,
they have the types that
you need them to have.
And if you ever need to generalize them,
usually you go right back to that variable
declaration, and
that's where you have to make a change.
So let's look at a similar example,
but with const.
So if we just change our let to const,
we can see that we get a different
type here, and that type is 6.
And you might think,
well 6 is a value, right?
Number is a type 6 is a value.
What we have here is
called a literal type and
it's a more specific kind of type.
It's not just any number,
it's any number that is 6.
You can think of it that way, right?
So the reason that changing let
to const has done this thing,
that we see before our eyes has
to do with two things going on.
One, it's the nature of const's
declarations, they can't be reassigned.
So we know that once we point it at a
thing, it will forever pointed that thing,
age will always point to
whatever it is assigned to.
And then the second is that, numbers in
JavaScript are immutable value types.
Unlike arrays, where that's a value type
where you can push things into it, right?
6 will always be 6, right?
We can create a new number, but
we can't change an existing number.
So basically,
this whole thing is poured and concrete,
where it's a variable that can
never point to something else.
And the thing it currently
points to cannot change.
So we know very specifically that
this is 6 and it will always be 6.
So TypeScript can make a safe
more specific assumption here.
And that's a theme we're going to
see over and over, by the way,
where TypeScript tries to make
the most specific assumption,
that it can without risking
getting in your way.
So 6 is called a literal type,
meaning it is literally the number 6 and
if we think about why we were
able to make this assumption
more specifically,
like we said in our two reasons there.
But imagine if we made that same kind
of very specific assumption with
a let declaration.
So if we go back up here,
what if we assumed age was always going
to be 6 that would get in our way, right?
Like the nature of let declarations we're
probably going to assign them to something
else in the future.
And that's why you get that
the more relaxed constraint there,
where normal code that treats this as
a number is going to behave nicely, right?
Don't want TypeScript
to get into your way.
We're gonna see literal types over and
over, but
you can just think of them
as a set of allowed values.
So sometimes we end up in situations
where we have to declare a variable,
and then the variable gets
its value sometime later.
So let's look at this piece of code
which begins with a timestamp,
and it ends up measuring a startTime and
then sometime
later when it finishes a random wait,
and it record an endTime.
So maybe we wanna have access to
this endTime in this outer scope.
But clearly like within
this set timeout function,
that's when it's actually
going to get its endTime.
So you could end up with
something like this.
And if we look at the way this is defined,
we can see that this is of type any that's
what this notation means, by the way.
EndTime is a variable, it's a let
declaration and it has a type called any.
Any is the most flexible
type in TypeScript.
And you can think of it kind of
like JavaScript variable rules,
where we could set it equal to
a string and then a number and
then a function and then null and
then whatever, there's no constraint.
It can be anything, any value that
is allowed in the JavaScript world.
So it's not necessarily bad, but
it's often much more
flexible than what you want.
And in this case, we can see that
there's just not enough information for
TypeScript to make a guess
as to what this should be.
Because types are assigned to variables
when those variables are born.
And when this is born, we don't know when
the set timeout is gonna be invoked, and
we don't know what value
it's going to get.
So in this case, we need to add
what's called a type annotation.
And that is our colon type syntax, right?
Where let here, what we're saying is,
endTime is a Date,
we're not giving it a value yet,
but it's going to get a Date and
you should treat it as if
it's going to get a Date.
And now when we for
some reason we're setting this to = to
0 before we give it its real endTime.
We're told that we can't give it a number.
This is a slot that's designed for a Date.
This is exactly what we should give it.
So now we're seeing enforcement of types.
I only add type annotations
like this when I have to,
because it's just extra
stuff in your code, and
it tends to make things a little
bit more difficult to refactor.
If you start adding types
all over the place, but
in this case it's absolutely
appropriate and absolutely necessary.
So let's look at functions.
This same syntax that we saw with
this variable up here, right?
Colon Date this can be used with our
add function here that we saw in
the first slide of the course.
It can be use to state that a and
b are numbers.
And this function add returns numbers.
You can see that by default,
everything ends up being any.
This is because like imagine
we were converting this from
a JavaScript file to a TypeScript file.
Maybe we start with everything loose and
then we wanna crank things up and
define the types as we go.
That's probably not what we
want in the end now, right?
So why is any gonna be
a problem in this case?
Well, look here.
This we know is gonna be 7 based on
the implementation of the function a+b.
So we know promise doesn't accept
7 as its constructor argument, but
TypeScript seems to be happy about this.
This is not the same point
that I was making before,
where the return value doesn't have
a type and therefore we could use it.
We can reach into it in unsafe ways.
If you have an any that's floating around.
If that value enters well typed code,
it will break that well typed code,
so the guarantees I have around
promises don't matter right now.
Because I have this any, so having
something like this floating around can
weaken your guarantees that
you have around your code.
It's kinda dangerous thin,
now I say dangerous.
It's only as dangerous as a regular
JavaScript variable, which is dangerous.
So let's add some type annotations here.
We can say that a and b are arguments,
each of them is a number.
And here it's very clear that
the result that's returned is a number.
And if we attempt to use this,
I mean, we already saw this example,
we can't pass a string in that's
not compatible with a number.
You may notice that, the return type
of the function is also inferred so
that number on the right
side of the tooltip,
the compiler is smart enough to figure out
that a + b, the result of adding those
numbers together is a number and
that's what's returned.